Addition of SCRUB guide (#148)
NASA-AMMOS/slim: docs/guides/software-lifecycle/security/security-scanning/README.md

# Security Scanning

<pre align="center">Guide to code scanning for security issues.</pre>

## Introduction

> **Background**: Software security is critical in modern systems with application code at its root. Identifying and addressing vulnerabilities rapidly mitigates risk and limits the potential surface area of attacks. We recommend [NASA's SCRUB platform](https://github.com/nasa/scrub) to manage code scanning by identifying, orchestrating and aggregating security information. SCRUB's GitHub implementation wraps [CodeQL](https://codeql.github.com/) results into compact, curated reports that highlight security assessments and are suitable for ingestion by automated reporting tools. A small configuration is appended to an existing CodeQL configuration (`codeql-config.yml` file) that specifies security analyses and reporting properties.

Reviewer: I prefer the Oxford or serial comma—but that's a personal taste issue: `…identifying, orchestrating, and aggregating…`

Reviewer 2: Thanks. I'm living in an old AP Style Guide world from a previous career, or is it Strunk and White? I'm fine either way!

**Use Cases**:

> - Standardized security reports that enables rapid interchange of scanning tools.

Reviewer: Since this is an enumeration and each isn't a complete sentence, no need for periods here.

Author: Done.

  - Streamlining management of known security considerations during codebase audits.
- Discovering security risks in code, such as:
  - Improper input validation
  - Weak encryption
  - Use of dangerous library functions
  - Other issues that may be difficult to identify via unit testing.
- Scanning local client repositories to identify exploitable security risks.
- Implementing a reporting loop in continuous integration (CI) pipelines using GitHub Actions to catch unforeseen risks.

---

## Prerequisites

> To get the most out of `SCRUB`, you'll need:

Reviewer: `SCRUB` is in monospace here but then isn't elsewhere (although, later on, it is again). Is this intentional?

Author: It was intentionally erratic. I've addressed this.

### Client-side Scan and Analysis
The developer's local environment is scanned directly using the `SCRUB` tool. After scanning, a report containing detected security issues is generated. Developers can audit this report for detailed information on detected security concerns.

#### Steps
1. **Installation**
   - Install the release version of  [SCRUB](https://nasa.github.io/scrub/installation.html).
     ```bash
     pip3 install --upgrade --user nasa-scrub
     ```

2. **Configuration**
   - Create a `scrub.cfg` configuration file. This file must be populated with project specific configuration values, depending on the tool that is being used. More information can be found in the [SCRUB documentation](https://nasa.github.io/scrub/configuration.html).

     ``` bash
     scrub get-conf --output scrub.cfg
     ```

3. **Scanning**
   - For more information about running SCRUB, refer to the [user documentation](https://nasa.github.io/scrub/usage.html)

    ```bash
    scrub run
    ```

4. **Checking Results**
   - Review the `<tool>.scrub` file to audit any reported security issues:

      ```bash
      vi .scrub/<tool>.scrub

>       ```

Reviewer: Steps reproduced successfully! ✓

Reviewer 2: Excellent! Thanks!

Author: There may be a few more changes, but I'll notify you when ready to run through again.

[View more on advanced SCRUB scan configuration](https://nasa.github.io/scrub/configuration-inputs.html)

> ℹ️ **Note**: Any confirmed security issues should be addressed and mitigated before pushing to remote repositories.

### GitHub.com Actions Analysis on Push and Pull Request

> Code is scanned for security risks within the repository. It leverages [GitHub Action](https://github.com/features/actions). The scan is triggered during a push or pull request and any detected security vulnerabilities are reported while blocking merges or pushes to protected branches.

Reviewer: I think GitHub calls it by the plural: "GitHub Actions".

Author: Done.

      2. A new *Post-Process Output* step has been added to generate a CSV output file that may be easily ingested by other systems
      3. A new *Upload CodeQL Artifacts* step has been added to produce a set of archive files for each run

```yaml
name: "CodeQL"

on:
  push:
    branches: [main, develop]
  pull_request:
    # The branches below must be a subset of the branches above
    branches: [develop]
  schedule:
    # default branch on sundays at 5a
    - cron: '0 5 * * 0'

jobs:
  analyze:
    name: Analyze
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    permissions:
      actions: write
      contents: read
      security-events: write

    strategy:
      fail-fast: false
      matrix:
        # CodeQL supports ['cpp', 'csharp', 'go', 'java', 'javascript', 'python', 'ruby']
        # Learn more about CodeQL language support at https://git.io/codeql-language-support
        language: ['python']

    steps:
    - name: Checkout repository
      uses: actions/checkout@v4
      with:
        fetch-depth: 0
    # Initializes the CodeQL tools for scanning.
    - name: Initialize CodeQL
      uses: github/codeql-action/init@v3
      with:

>         #config-file: ./.github/workflows/codeql/codeql-config.yml

Reviewer: Why is `config-file` commented-out here? I like the practice of always including a comment whenever something is commented-out—and if nothing appropriate comes to mind, then just delete the line!

Author: I've added  another comment for context.

    # 📚 https://git.io/JvXDl

    # ✏️ If the Autobuild fails above, remove it and uncomment the following three lines
    #    and modify them (or add more) to build your code if your project
    #    uses a compiled language

    #- run: |
    #   make bootstrap
    #   make release

    - name: Perform CodeQL Analysis
      uses: github/codeql-action/analyze@v3

    - name: Post-Process Output
      run: |
        python3 -m pip install nasa-scrub

        results_dir=`realpath ${{ github.workspace }}/../results`
        sarif_files=`find $results_dir -name '*.sarif'`

        for sarif_file in $sarif_files
        do
          output_file="$results_dir/$(basename $sarif_file .sarif).scrub"

          python3 -m scrub.tools.parsers.translate_results $sarif_file $output_file ${{ github.workspace }} scrub
        done

        python3 -m scrub.tools.parsers.csv_parser $results_dir

        echo "RESULTS_DIR=$results_dir" >> $GITHUB_ENV

    - name: Upload CodeQL Artifacts
      uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
      with:
        name: codeql-artifacts
        path: ${{ env.RESULTS_DIR }}
        if-no-files-found: error
        overwrite: true
        retention-days: 15

> ```

Reviewer: `yamllint` reports success ✓

Author: Yay!

---

> ### Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)

Reviewer: Should this be an `h3` (`###`) or an `h2` (`##`)?

Author: Great catch. Thanks. 

Done.

    5. _Commit:_ At this point you're ready to commit your code changes. Merge as you normally would. You may want to call out the security specific nature in your commit message to make users aware of the criticality.
    6. _Educate and Prevent:_ To avoid such instances in the future, educate your team on the importance of code security and potential risks. Consider adopting practices or tools that identify risks early in development cycles. You may also consider if it would be helpful to modify your project's coding standard to improve code quality.

- Q: **Where can I find more configurations and options for `SCRUB`?**

  A: Refer to the official documentation for [SCRUB](https://nasa.github.io/scrub).

---

## Credits

**Authorship**:
- Lyle Barner [@lylebarner](https://github.com/lylebarner)
- John Engelke [@ingyhere](http://github.com/ingyhere)

**Acknowledgements**:
- [Rishi Verma](http://github.com/riverma)

---

## Feedback and Contributions

> We value your feedback and contributions. Enhance and expand this guide by referring to our [contribution guidelines](https://nasa-ammos.github.io/slim/docs/contribute/contributing/).

Reviewer: All links check out ✓

Author: Yay!

                - name: Initialize CodeQL
                  uses: github/codeql-action/init@v3
                  # note that CodeQL 
                  with:
                    # optional config file for scan tool, in this case CodeQL
                    # config-file: ./.github/workflows/codeql/codeql-config.yml
                    languages: ${{ matrix.language }}
                    # If you wish to specify custom queries, you can do so here or in a config file.
                    # By default, queries listed here will override any specified in a config file.
                    # Prefix the list here with "+" to use these queries and those in the config file.
                    # queries: ./path/to/local/query, your-org/your-repo/queries@main
                    queries: security-and-quality, security-extended
          
                # ℹ️ Command-line programs to run using the OS shell.
                # 📚 https://git.io/JvXDl
          
                # ✏️ If the Autobuild fails above, remove it and uncomment the following three lines
                #    and modify them (or add more) to build your code if your project
                #    uses a compiled language

>           

Author: Need @lylebarner input on Autobuild scripting here.

# Security Scanning

<pre align="center">Guide to code scanning for security issues.</pre>

## Introduction

**Background**: Software security is critical in modern systems with application code at its root. Identifying and addressing vulnerabilities rapidly mitigates risk and limits the potential surface area of attacks. We recommend [NASA's SCRUB platform](https://github.com/nasa/scrub) to manage code scanning by identifying, orchestrating and aggregating security information. SCRUB's GitHub implementation wraps [CodeQL](https://codeql.github.com/) results into compact, curated reports that highlight security assessments and are suitable for ingestion by automated reporting tools. A small configuration is appended to an existing CodeQL configuration (`codeql-config.yml` file) that specifies security analyses and reporting properties.

> **Use Cases**:

Reviewer 3: I think it'd be helpful to list the main driver use case for SCRUB versus just using one of the underlying tools on their own. For example "Enable interchangeability of multiple code scanning tools using a single reporting interface". Suggestion to list something like that at the top. I'm saying this because someone not knowledgable about SCRUB may wonder: _why can't I just run the code scanning tools on my own?_

Author: This has been addressed.

> - Finding and mitigating security risks in code, such as:

Reviewer 3: Mitigating as well? Or is that on the user after having been told of a vulnerability?

Author: Correct, the mitigation component is on the developer.

Author: Resolved with edits.

  - Improper input validation
  - Weak encryption
  - Use of dangerous library functions
- Scanning local client repositories to identify exploitable security risks.
- Identifying issues that may be difficult to identify via unit testing.
- Implementing a reporting loop in continuous integration (CI) pipelines using GitHub Actions to catch unforeseen risks.
- Streamlining management of known security considerations during codebase audits.

---

## Prerequisites
To get the most out of `SCRUB`, you'll need:

* Python 3 with the `pip` tool installed
* Static analysis tools installed and ready for use

>    * CodeQL, SonarQube, and Pylint are some common examples

Reviewer 3: SCRUB has many tools supported. Which do we recommend and why? I think a bit of guidance there would be helpful. For example, do we recommend running both CodeQL and SonarQube, or just one of the two?

Author: I'm not sure that should be addressed here as it seems like a much richer topic. The tool needs to fit the language specialty and the settings need to fit whether static, dynamic or specific language concerns are addressed. For instance, an SQL scanning tool wouldn't be appropriate to scan a codebase without SQL. ...

Author: So to summarize, I would review this after a code security reference architecture (like the continuous integration reference architecture) is created, then this could be modified to refer back to it.

* (Optional) Familiarity with BASH and/or Python for potential customizations
* (Optional) A GitHub repository supporting GitHub Actions

---

## Step-by-Step Guide

SCRUB may be run locally or as a CI workflow action, such as in GitHub Actions. Please see below sections for further details.

### Client-side Scan and Analysis
The developer's local environment is scanned directly using the `SCRUB` tool. After scanning, a report containing detected security issues is generated. Developers can audit this report for detailed information on detected security concerns.

#### Steps
1. **Installation**
   - Install the release version of  [SCRUB](https://nasa.github.io/scrub/installation.html).
     ```bash
     pip3 install --upgrade --user nasa-scrub
     ```

> 2. **Configuration**

Reviewer 3: Can we ship this guide with some _working_ `scrub.cfg` file examples the reader can just drop in and start using?

Author: I'm planning to rename it as `scrub.yml` and, yes, I'll try to add some examples for `scrub.cfg`.

Reviewer 3: Sorry - you were thinking of renaming what to `scrub.yml`? 

> I'll try to add some examples for `scrub.cfg`

Awesome! If we can include those files not just as snippets but stand-alone files within `/security-scanning`, that would allow our infusion automation to easily pick up and propose a solution via pull requests. Now that I think of it: if I wanted to say propose the recommendations you all have put down here via a pull request to a given project repository, which files would I need to propose? A `scrub.cfg` and a GitHub Action workflow file? Again - having not just a snippet but a file version of the two would make infusion automation much easier to do.

Author: Sorry, to clarify, 

Workflow file (example in slim-starterkit-python):
`codeql.yml` -> `scrub.yml`

The config file would be the same name...

Reviewer 3: Got it @ingyhere - that makes sense!

Author: Done, not resolved yet. Needs a little more testing.

     ``` bash
     scrub get-conf --output scrub.cfg
     ```

3. **Scanning**
   - For more information about running SCRUB, refer to the [user documentation](https://nasa.github.io/scrub/usage.html)

    ```bash
    scrub run
    ```

4. **Checking Results**
   - Review the `<tool>.scrub` file to audit any reported security issues:

      ```bash
      vi .scrub/<tool>.scrub
      ```

[View more on advanced SCRUB scan configuration](https://nasa.github.io/scrub/configuration-inputs.html)

> ℹ️ **Note**: Any confirmed security issues should be addressed and mitigated before pushing to remote repositories.

### GitHub.com Actions Analysis on Push and Pull Request

Code is scanned for security risks within the repository. It leverages [GitHub Action](https://github.com/features/actions). The scan is triggered during a push or pull request and any detected security vulnerabilities are reported while blocking merges or pushes to protected branches.

#### Steps
1. **Workflow Creation**

>    - The first step is to create a `codeql.yaml` workflow file in the `.github/workflows` directory to define the GitHub action. Copy and paste the below while ensuring the correct branch of your codebase is referenced. For example (from the [Slim Python Starter Kit](https://github.com/NASA-AMMOS/slim-starterkit-python/blob/main/.github/workflows/codeql.yml)):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - The first step is to create a `codeql.yaml` workflow file in the `.github/workflows` directory to define the GitHub action. Copy and paste the below to your new file while ensuring the correct branch of your codebase is referenced. For example, the following configuration scans for CodeQL security and quality checks for Python language code. Note: the below is also available through the [SLIM Python Starter Kit](https://github.com/NASA-AMMOS/slim-starterkit-python/blob/main/.github/workflows/codeql.yml):
```

   - This workflow is based on the default CodeQL workflow file with three modifications:
      1. Under the *Initialize CodeQL* step, the `queries` entity has been added to enable all of the available security queries
      2. A new *Post-Process Output* step has been added to generate a CSV output file that may be easily ingested by other systems
      3. A new *Upload CodeQL Artifacts* step has been added to produce a set of archive files for each run

```yaml
name: "CodeQL"

on:
  push:
    branches: [main, develop]
  pull_request:
    # The branches below must be a subset of the branches above

>     branches: [develop]

Author: Done

  schedule:

>     # default branch on sundays at 5a

Reviewer 3: Add a comment about which timezone this is (local, or UTC)

Author: It's UTC by default. Done.

    - cron: '0 5 * * 0'

jobs:
  analyze:
    name: Analyze
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    permissions:
      actions: write
      contents: read
      security-events: write

    strategy:
      fail-fast: false
      matrix:
        # CodeQL supports ['cpp', 'csharp', 'go', 'java', 'javascript', 'python', 'ruby']
        # Learn more about CodeQL language support at https://git.io/codeql-language-support

>         language: ['python']

Author: In most cases it should automatically build correctly. But there is an additional step that can be implemented (see comments) to manually build. This is a bit more involved, see [this](https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/code-scanning/creating-an-advanced-setup-for-code-scanning/codeql-code-scanning-for-compiled-languages#about-the-codeql-analysis-workflow-and-compiled-languages).

>         language: ['python']

Author: After re-reviewing, the comments, ordering and documentation here need a bit of work.

    # 📚 https://git.io/JvXDl

    # ✏️ If the Autobuild fails above, remove it and uncomment the following three lines
    #    and modify them (or add more) to build your code if your project
    #    uses a compiled language

    #- run: |
    #   make bootstrap
    #   make release

    - name: Perform CodeQL Analysis
      uses: github/codeql-action/analyze@v3

    - name: Post-Process Output
      run: |
        python3 -m pip install nasa-scrub

        results_dir=`realpath ${{ github.workspace }}/../results`
        sarif_files=`find $results_dir -name '*.sarif'`

        for sarif_file in $sarif_files
        do
          output_file="$results_dir/$(basename $sarif_file .sarif).scrub"

          python3 -m scrub.tools.parsers.translate_results $sarif_file $output_file ${{ github.workspace }} scrub
        done

        python3 -m scrub.tools.parsers.csv_parser $results_dir

        echo "RESULTS_DIR=$results_dir" >> $GITHUB_ENV

    - name: Upload CodeQL Artifacts
      uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
      with:
        name: codeql-artifacts
        path: ${{ env.RESULTS_DIR }}
        if-no-files-found: error
        overwrite: true
        retention-days: 15
```

>      > ℹ️  Explanation: The GitHub Action checks out code, installs necessary packages, checks for a baseline file, and scans the repository for secrets. If new secrets are detected, the build fails and provides guidance.

Reviewer 3: Content from this line through line 175 is from the [Secrets Detection guide](https://github.com/NASA-AMMOS/slim/blob/main/docs/guides/software-lifecycle/security/secrets-detection/README.md?plain=1#L232-L236) and should be removed ;)

Author: Removed. ... **Note to self:** Check guide for structure to make sure it flows like the other guides.

# Security Scanning

<pre align="center">Guide to code scanning for security issues.</pre>

## Introduction

**Background**: Software security is critical in modern systems with application code at its root. Identifying and addressing vulnerabilities rapidly mitigates risk and limits the potential surface area of attacks. We recommend [NASA's SCRUB platform](https://github.com/nasa/scrub) to manage code scanning by identifying, orchestrating and aggregating security information. SCRUB's GitHub implementation wraps [CodeQL](https://codeql.github.com/) results into compact, curated reports that highlight security assessments and are suitable for ingestion by automated reporting tools. A small configuration is appended to an existing CodeQL configuration (`codeql-config.yml` file) that specifies security analyses and reporting properties.  

**Use Cases**:
- Finding and mitigating security risks in code, such as:

>   - unknown

Reviewer 3: Great progress so far! I think filling this section out will really help readers understand what our guide could help with and what it couldn't.

By the way - do you think there's overlap or synergy with [this ticket](https://github.com/NASA-AMMOS/slim/issues/109)? We have [a PR](https://github.com/NASA-AMMOS/slim/pull/116) for that ticket still awaiting finalization. Wonder if it makes sense to bring the two together?

Author: > Do you think there's overlap or synergy with [this ticket](https://github.com/NASA-AMMOS/slim/issues/109)? We have [a PR](https://github.com/NASA-AMMOS/slim/pull/116) for that ticket still awaiting finalization. Wonder if it makes sense to bring the two together?

I feel they are separate concerns. This is the actual implementation. That feels more like a reference guide that deals with a number of concerns of which code security scanning would be one. I think the result of that ticket -- a Security Guide -- should reference this implementation.

Author: Okay, I'm resolving this comment. I renamed the [referenced ticket](https://github.com/NASA-AMMOS/slim/issues/109) to reflect a ticket to create a Security Reference Architecture.

- Scanning local client repositories to identify exploitable security risks.
- Implementing a reporting loop in continuous integration (CI) pipelines using GitHub Actions to catch unforeseen risks.
- Streamlining management of known security considerations during codebase audits.

---

## Prerequisites
To get the most out of `SCRUB`, you'll need:

* Python 3 with the `pip` tool installed.
* (Optional) Familiarity with BASH and/or Python for potential customizations.
* (Optional) A GitHub repository supporting GitHub Actions.

---

## Quick Start

1. Install SCRUB:

   ```bash
   pip install --upgrade nasa-scrub
   ```
   
2. Execute a baseline scan:

   ```bash
   scrub ...
   ```

3. Review the `foo` file to audit any reported security issues:

   ```bash
   vi ...
   ```

Additional steps such as customizing reports and/or enabling further automation are covered in detail below.

---

## Step-by-Step Guide

SCRUB may be run locally or as a CI workflow action, such as in GitHub Actions. Please see below sections for further details. 

> ### Table of Contents

Reviewer 3: Hey @ingyhere - the TOC are automatically generated by Docusaurus and appear in the right hand panel. I'd remove it from the guide itself since not only is the content duplicated, but needs to be maintained by an author. 

For example, see the right hand-panel on this guide: https://nasa-ammos.github.io/slim/docs/guides/software-lifecycle/security/secrets-detection/

Reviewer 4: @riverma I just made a few commits to update some information. I have also removed the TOC as part of these updates.

Reviewer 3: Thanks @lylebarner!

     ```

3. **Checking Results**
   - View the results in the baseline file.
     ```bash
     ...
     ```

4. **Analysis**
   - Analyze results using the `audit` tool.
     ```bash
     ...
     ```

[View more on advanced SCRUB scan configuration](https://nasa.github.io/scrub/configuration-inputs.html)

> ℹ️ **Note**: Any confirmed security issues should be addressed and mitigated before pushing to remote repositories.

### GitHub.com Actions Analysis on Push and Pull Request

Code is scanned for security risks within the repository. It leverages [GitHub Action](https://github.com/features/actions). The scan is triggered during a push or pull request and any detected security vulnerabilities are reported while blocking merges or pushes to protected branches.

#### Steps
1. **Workflow Creation**
   - The first step is to create a `codeql.yaml` workflow file in the `.github/workflows` directory to define the GitHub action. Copy and paste the below while ensuring the correct branch of your codebase is referenced. For example (from the [Slim Python Starter Kit](https://github.com/NASA-AMMOS/slim-starterkit-python/blob/main/.github/workflows/codeql.yml)):
  

> ```yaml

Reviewer 3: Indentation here would be good.

Author: Indentation ... Do you mean with the code sample or text?

Author: @riverma Indentation ... Do you mean with the code sample or text?

Reviewer 3: @ingyhere - sorry - meant the code (yaml) sample block. It is easier to read if it's indented with the text prior to it.
